---
layout: single
title:  "A Handcrafted Dovetail Box"
date:   2021-01-15 10:45:00 -0400
categories: woodworking handtools box
header:
  teaser: /assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/teaser.jpg
  og_image: /assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/teaser.jpg
  image: /assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/header.jpg
---

![Dovetail box front]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/DSC_0520.JPG)

My educational background is in Electrical and Computer Engineering with a
strong bent towards Computer Science. This means that I spend most of my day
typing on a computer, reading technical papers, designing systems, writing
code, and communicating with team members. Even when I am designing mechanical
systems for the real world or using CAD programs to 3D print objects, almost
all the work is done on a computer. That's why I prioritize woodworking. I
believe, that as humans, we need short-term, tangible (i.e., physical) outcomes
to keep us from obsessing over potentially non-real things. Woodworking
provides the physical connection to the world that so many computer-addicted
folks desire. I can't tell you how many times I've come across a programmer's
blog who also listed "woodworking" as one of their hobbies. I should probably
start a Meetup.com group for these people (myself included). Throw in
"bicycling" and my target support group is pretty well defined.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/venn-diagram.png" alt="One of us. One of us." caption="One of us. One of us." %}

Now that I have sufficiently pigeonholed myself, I can describe the dovetail
box. I built this dovetail box as a Christmas present for my father. With the
2020 pandemic in full-force, which made visiting family members irresponsible,
I decided that a hand-made gift was better than feeding the online e-commerce
beast. After I bought the lumber from a store, I built it completely with hand
tools, no electricity required.

{% include figure image_path="/assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/handtools.jpg" alt="Hand tools" caption="Saws, blades, steel, and blood (my own)." %}

The box is made from 3/4 inch poplar that I purchased from a local hardware
store. Poplar is a nice wood for beginner hand tool woodworkers. It is
considered a "hard" wood, which means it is less likely to splinter and shatter
like pine, but it won't dull the edges of your blades as quickly as other hard
woods, such as red oak. Also, poplar is widely available in the big box stores
at a reasonable price. Since my 7th grade wood shop class didn't teach us how
to use traditional hand tools, I learned from the masters on YouTube. When
possible, I subscribe to the [Paul
Sellers](https://www.youtube.com/user/PaulSellersWoodwork) school of thought
when working wood. Many of the techniques that I used to build this dovetail
box were from his video on the [same
subject](https://youtu.be/SibYJ8JtOo4).

![Side detail 2]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/DSC_0531.JPG)

What is both appealing and intimidating about Paul Seller's approach to
woodworking is that it requires practice, artistry, and learned skills. Anyone
can read learn how to make straight cuts on a table saw in a matter of minutes,
but learning how to set and use a plane to flatten a piece of wood could take
months or years. For Paul Sellers, the woodworker's skill with the saw or plane
can overcome any imperfections in the wood or tool - "A Good Craftsman Never
Blames His Tools" (of course this statement has multiple
[interpretations](http://www.javiercasas.com/articles/good-craftsman-never-blames-tools/)). From
my perspective, woodworking is a hobby that I use to escape from the technical
perfection that is required in my daily profession. I enjoyed rounding over the
edges of this box with a hand plane, which felt like free-hand sculpting.

![Side detail 1]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/DSC_0524.JPG)

I have also borrowed techniques from [David
Barron](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ibyTMTLjaq8&t=122s). I prefer his
technique of using a fine-toothed [coping
saw](https://www.highlandwoodworking.com/knew-concepts-5in-woodworkers-fretsaw.aspx)
to cut the waste from dovetails instead of "chopping" them with a chisel, which
Paul Sellers prefers. Still, I often use Paul Sellers' technique for setting
and installing hinges for box lids and doors. The accuracy on these recessed
hinges, without using a measuring device or jig, is quite satisfying.

![Box hinges]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/DSC_0522.JPG)

Poplar isn't known for having nicely "figured" wood. However, I was able to
identify an interesting feature on this poplar and I used it on the lid of the
box.

![Top detail]({{ site.url }}{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/2021-01-15-dovetail-box/DSC_0526.JPG)

To finish the box, I used a single coat of [colonial maple
stain](https://www.lowes.com/pd/Minwax-Wood-Finish-Satin-Colonial-Maple-Oil-based-Interior-Stain-Actual-Net-Contents-8-fl-oz/999914527)
and two coats of [danish
oil](https://www.lowes.com/pd/WATCO-Brown-Danish-Oil-Actual-Net-Contents-16-fl-oz/3142391?cm_mmc=shp-_-c-_-prd-_-pnt-_-google-_-lia-_-219-_-interiorstains-_-3142391-_-0&placeholder=null&ds_rl=1286981&gclid=CjwKCAiAl4WABhAJEiwATUnEF7em7_JC6P0BLgOs2R5DDnbi1EAVwbkwTVPzFNpFH6uf2b3KiRXH0hoCgR8QAvD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds).

When the lock down of 2020 began, I made myself a commitment to improve my hand
tool working skills. Getting better at using hand tools is very similar to
getting better at playing a musical instrument (c.f. [Jeff
Miller](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/18886619-the-foundations-of-better-woodworking)]). Both
activities require constant regular practice and assessment. Excuse me while I
go make 365 dovetail boxes.
